draft-ietf-ccamp-rfc9093-bis.md, before:

---
coding: utf-8

title: A YANG Data Model for Layer 0 Types

abbrev: Yang for Layer 0 Types
docname: draft-ietf-ccamp-rfc9093-bis-05
obsoletes: 9093
submissiontype: IETF
workgroup: CCAMP Working Group
category: std
ipr: trust200902

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]

author:
  -
    name: Sergio Belotti
    org: Nokia
    role: editor
    email: sergio.belotti@nokia.com
  -
    name: Italo Busi
    org: Huawei
    role: editor
    email: italo.busi@huawei.com
  -
    name: Dieter Beller
    org: Nokia
    role: editor
    email: dieter.beller@nokia.com
  -
    name: Haomian Zheng
    org: Huawei
    email: zhenghaomian@huawei.com
  -
    name: Esther Le Rouzic
    ins: E. Le Rouzic
    org: Orange
    email: esther.lerouzic@orange.com
  -
    name: Aihua Guo
    org: Futurewei Technologies
    email: aihuaguo.ietf@gmail.com
  -
    name: Daniel King
    org: University of Lancaster
    email: d.king@lancaster.ac.uk

contributor:
  -
    name: Gabriele Galimberti
    org: Cisco
    email: ggalimbe@cisco.com
  -
    name: Enrico Griseri
    org: Nokia
    email: Enrico.Griseri@nokia.com
  -
    name: Dhruv Dhody
    org: Huawei
    email: dhruv.ietf@gmail.com
  -
    name: Bin Yeong Yoon
    org: ETRI
    email: byyun@etri.re.kr
  -
    name: Ricard Vilalta
    org: CTTC
    email: ricard.vilalta@cttc.es
  -
    name: Young Lee
    org: Samsung
    email: younglee.tx@gmail.com
  -
    name: Victor Lopez
    org: Nokia
    email: victor.lopez@nokia.com

normative:
  ITU-T_G.698.2:
    title: >
      Amplified multichannel dense wavelength division
      multiplexing applications with single channel optical
      interfaces
    author:
      org: ITU-T Recommendation G.698.2
    date: November 2018
    seriesinfo: ITU-T G.698.2

informative:
  ITU-T_G.694.1:
    title: "Spectral grids for WDM applications: DWDM frequency grid"
    author:
      org: ITU-T Recommendation G.694.1
    date: October 2020
    seriesinfo: ITU-T G.694.1
  ITU-T_G.694.2:
    title: "Spectral grids for WDM applications: CWDM wavelength grid"
    author:
      org: ITU-T Recommendation G.694.2
    date: December 2003
    seriesinfo: ITU-T G.694.2

--- abstract

   This document defines a collection of common data types and groupings
   in the YANG data modeling language.  These derived common types and
   groupings are intended to be imported by modules that model Layer 0
   optical Traffic Engineering (TE) configuration and state capabilities
   such as Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSONs) and flexi-grid
   Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) networks.

   This document obsoletes RFC 9093.

--- middle

# Introduction

   YANG {{!RFC7950}} is a data modeling language used to model
   configuration data, state data, Remote Procedure Calls, and
   notifications for network management protocols such as the Network
   Configuration Protocol (NETCONF) {{!RFC6241}}.  The YANG language
   supports a small set of built-in data types and provides mechanisms
   to derive other types from the built-in types.

   This document introduces a collection of common data types derived
   from the built-in YANG data types.  The derived types and groupings
   are designed to be the common types applicable for modeling Traffic
   Engineering (TE) features as well as non-TE features (e.g., physical
   network configuration aspects) for Layer 0 optical networks in
   model(s) defined outside of this document.  The applicability of
   Layer 0 types specified in this document includes Wavelength Switched
   Optical Networks (WSONs) {{!RFC6163}} {{ITU-T_G.698.2}} and flexi-grid Dense
   Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) networks {{!RFC7698}}
   {{ITU-T_G.694.1}}.

   This document adds new type definitions to the YANG modules and
   obsoletes {{?RFC9093}}.  For further details, see the revision
   statements of the YANG module in {{yang-code}} or the summary in
   {{changes-bis}}.

   The YANG data model in this document conforms to the Network
   Management Datastore Architecture defined in {{!RFC8342}}.

## Terminology and Notations

   Refer to {{?RFC7446}} and {{?RFC7581}} for the key terms used in this
   document, and the terminology for describing YANG data models can be
   found in {{!RFC7950}}.

{::boilerplate bcp14}

## Prefix in Data Node Names

   In this document, names of data nodes and other data model objects
   are prefixed using the standard prefix associated with the
   corresponding YANG imported modules.

| Prefix       | YANG module                      | Reference
| l0-types     | ietf-layer0-types                | RFC XXXX
{: #tab-prefixes title="Prefixes and corresponding YANG modules"}

RFC Editor Note:
Please replace XXXX with the RFC number assigned to this document.

   The YANG module "ietf-layer0-types" (defined in {{yang-code}}) references
   {{!RFC4203}}, {{!RFC6163}}, {{!RFC6205}}, {{!RFC7698}}, {{!RFC7699}}, {{!RFC8363}},
   {{ITU-T_G.694.1}}, and {{ITU-T_G.694.2}}.

# Layer 0 Types Module Contents

   This document defines a YANG module for common Layer 0 types, ietf-
   layer0-types.  This module is used for WSON and flexi-grid DWDM
   networks.  The "ietf-layer0-types" module contains the following YANG
   reusable types and groupings:

   l0-grid-type:

   > A base YANG identity for the grid type as defined in {{!RFC6163}} and
     {{!RFC7698}}.

   dwdm-ch-spc-type:

   > A base YANG identity for the DWDM channel-spacing type as defined
     in {{!RFC6205}}.

   cwdm-ch-spc-type:

   > A base YANG identity for the Coarse Wavelength Division
     Multiplexing (CWDM) channel-spacing type as defined in {{!RFC6205}}.

   wson-label-start-end:

   > The WSON label range was defined in {{!RFC6205}}, and the generic
     topology model defines the label-start/label-end in {{!RFC8795}}.
     This grouping shows the WSON-specific label-start and label-end
     information.

   wson-label-hop:

   > The WSON label range was defined in {{!RFC6205}}, and the generic
     topology model defines the label-hop in {{!RFC8795}}.  This grouping
     shows the WSON-specific label-hop information.

   l0-label-range-info:

   > A YANG grouping that defines the Layer 0 label range information
     applicable for WSON as defined in {{!RFC6205}}.  This grouping is
     used in the flexi-grid DWDM by adding more flexi-grid-specific
     parameters.

   wson-label-step:

   > A YANG grouping that defines label steps for WSON as defined in
     {{!RFC8776}}.

   flexi-grid-label-start-end:

   > The flexi-grid label range was defined in {{!RFC7698}}, and the
     generic topology model defines the label-start/label-end in
     {{!RFC8795}}.  This grouping shows the flexi-grid-specific label-
     start and label-end information.

   flexi-grid-label-hop:

   > The flexi-grid label range was defined in {{!RFC7698}}, and the
     generic topology model defines the label-hop in {{!RFC8795}}.  This
     grouping shows the WSON-specific label-hop information.

   flexi-grid-label-range-info:

   > A YANG grouping that defines flexi-grid label range information as
     defined in {{!RFC7698}} and {{!RFC8363}}.

   flexi-grid-label-step:

   > A YANG grouping that defines flexi-grid label steps as defined in
     {{!RFC8776}}.

   transceiver-capabilities:

   > a YANG grouping to define the transceiver capabilities (also called
   "modes") needed to determine optical signal compatibility.

   standard-mode:

   > a YANG grouping for ITU-T G.698.2 standard mode that guarantees
   interoperability.

   organizational-mode:

   > a YANG grouping to define transponder operational mode supported by
   organizations or vendors.

   common-explicit-mode:

   > a YANG grouping to define the list of attributes related to optical
   impairments limits in case of transceiver explicit mode.  This
   grouping should be the same used in
   {{?I-D.ietf-ccamp-dwdm-if-param-yang}}.

   common-organizational-explicit-mode:

   > a YANG grouping to define the common capabilities attributes limit
   range in case of operational mode and explicit mode.  Also this
   grouping should be used in {{?I-D.ietf-ccamp-dwdm-if-param-yang}}.

   cd-pmd-penalty:
   
   > a YANG grouping to define the triplet used as entries in the list
   optional penalty associated with a given accumulated CD and PMD.
   This list of triplet cd, pmd, penalty can be used to sample the
   function penalty = f(CD, PMD).

{: #yang-code}

# YANG Module for Layer 0 Types

~~~~ yang
{::include ./ietf-layer0-types.yang}
~~~~
{: #fig-te-yang title="Layer 0 Types YANG module"
sourcecode-markers="true" sourcecode-name="ietf-layer0-types@2023-03-07.yang"}


# Security Considerations

   The YANG module specified in this document defines a schema for data
   that is designed to be accessed via network management protocols such
   as NETCONF {{!RFC6241}} or RESTCONF {{!RFC8040}}.  The lowest NETCONF layer
   is the secure transport layer, and the mandatory-to-implement secure
   transport is Secure Shell (SSH) {{!RFC6242}}.  The lowest RESTCONF layer
   is HTTPS, and the mandatory-to-implement secure transport is TLS
   {{!RFC8446}}.

   The Network Configuration Access Control Model (NACM) {{!RFC8341}}
   provides the means to restrict access for particular NETCONF or
   RESTCONF users to a preconfigured subset of all available NETCONF or
   RESTCONF protocol operations and content.  The NETCONF protocol over
   Secure Shell (SSH) specification {{!RFC6242}} describes a method for
   invoking and running NETCONF within a Secure Shell (SSH) session as
   an SSH subsystem.

   The objects in this YANG module are common data types and groupings.
   No object in this module can be read or written to.  These
   definitions can be imported and used by other Layer 0 specific
   modules.  It is critical to consider how imported definitions will be
   utilized and accessible via RPC operations, as the resultant schema
   will have data nodes that can be writable, or readable, and will have
   a significant effect on the network operations if used incorrectly or
   maliciously.  All of these considerations belong in the document that
   defines the modules that import from this YANG module.  Therefore, it
   is important to manage access to resultant data nodes that are
   considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.

   The security considerations spelled out in the YANG 1.1 specification
   {{!RFC7950}} apply for this document as well.

# IANA Considerations

For the following URI in the "IETF XML Registry" {{?RFC3688}}, IANA has updated the reference field to refer to this document:

~~~~
   URI:  urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-layer0-types
   Registrant Contact:  The IESG
   XML:  N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
~~~~

This document also adds an updated YANG module to the "YANG Module
Names" registry {{!RFC7950}}:

~~~~
   Name:  ietf-layer0-types
   Namespace:  urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-layer0-types
   Prefix:  l0-types
   Reference:  RFC XXXX
~~~~

RFC Editor Note: Please replace XXXX with the RFC number assigned to this document.

--- back

{: #changes-bis}

# Changes from RFC 9093

To be added in a future revision of this draft.

{: numbered="false"}

# Acknowledgments

   The authors and the working group give their sincere thanks to Robert
   Wilton for the YANG doctor review and Tom Petch for his comments
   during the model and document development.

   This document was prepared using kramdown.

Commit message:

Added changes from https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/commit/d4308b39420b63203a1a2234d1c76a3153387af5 and https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/commit/3a61c2b773ed0e32b106cc86bd8c48f6fe8c19b1
Co-authored-by: sergio belotti <sergio.belotti@nokia.com>

draft-ietf-ccamp-rfc9093-bis.md, after:

---
coding: utf-8

title: A YANG Data Model for Layer 0 Types

abbrev: Yang for Layer 0 Types
docname: draft-ietf-ccamp-rfc9093-bis-05
obsoletes: 9093
submissiontype: IETF
workgroup: CCAMP Working Group
category: std
ipr: trust200902

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]

author:
  -
    name: Sergio Belotti
    org: Nokia
    role: editor
    email: sergio.belotti@nokia.com
  -
    name: Italo Busi
    org: Huawei
    role: editor
    email: italo.busi@huawei.com
  -
    name: Dieter Beller
    org: Nokia
    role: editor
    email: dieter.beller@nokia.com
  -
    name: Haomian Zheng
    org: Huawei
    email: zhenghaomian@huawei.com
  -
    name: Esther Le Rouzic
    ins: E. Le Rouzic
    org: Orange
    email: esther.lerouzic@orange.com
  -
    name: Aihua Guo
    org: Futurewei Technologies
    email: aihuaguo.ietf@gmail.com
  -
    name: Daniel King
    org: University of Lancaster
    email: d.king@lancaster.ac.uk

contributor:
  -
    name: Gabriele Galimberti
    org: Cisco
    email: ggalimbe@cisco.com
  -
    name: Enrico Griseri
    org: Nokia
    email: Enrico.Griseri@nokia.com
  -
    name: Dhruv Dhody
    org: Huawei
    email: dhruv.ietf@gmail.com
  -
    name: Bin Yeong Yoon
    org: ETRI
    email: byyun@etri.re.kr
  -
    name: Ricard Vilalta
    org: CTTC
    email: ricard.vilalta@cttc.es
  -
    name: Young Lee
    org: Samsung
    email: younglee.tx@gmail.com
  -
    name: Victor Lopez
    org: Nokia
    email: victor.lopez@nokia.com

normative:
  ITU-T_G.698.2:
    title: >
      Amplified multichannel dense wavelength division
      multiplexing applications with single channel optical
      interfaces
    author:
      org: ITU-T Recommendation G.698.2
    date: November 2018
    seriesinfo: ITU-T G.698.2

informative:
  ITU-T_G.694.1:
    title: "Spectral grids for WDM applications: DWDM frequency grid"
    author:
      org: ITU-T Recommendation G.694.1
    date: October 2020
    seriesinfo: ITU-T G.694.1
  ITU-T_G.694.2:
    title: "Spectral grids for WDM applications: CWDM wavelength grid"
    author:
      org: ITU-T Recommendation G.694.2
    date: December 2003
    seriesinfo: ITU-T G.694.2

--- abstract

   This document defines a collection of common data types and groupings
   in the YANG data modeling language.  These derived common types and
   groupings are intended to be imported by modules that model Layer 0
   optical Traffic Engineering (TE) configuration and state capabilities
   such as Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSONs) and flexi-grid
   Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) networks.

   This document obsoletes RFC 9093.

--- middle

# Introduction

   YANG {{!RFC7950}} is a data modeling language used to model
   configuration data, state data, Remote Procedure Calls, and
   notifications for network management protocols such as the Network
   Configuration Protocol (NETCONF) {{!RFC6241}}.  The YANG language
   supports a small set of built-in data types and provides mechanisms
   to derive other types from the built-in types.

   This document introduces a collection of common data types derived
   from the built-in YANG data types.  The derived types and groupings
   are designed to be the common types applicable for modeling Traffic
   Engineering (TE) features as well as non-TE features (e.g., physical
   network configuration aspects) for Layer 0 optical networks in
   model(s) defined outside of this document.  The applicability of
   Layer 0 types specified in this document includes Wavelength Switched
   Optical Networks (WSONs) {{!RFC6163}} {{ITU-T_G.698.2}} and flexi-grid Dense
   Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) networks {{!RFC7698}}
   {{ITU-T_G.694.1}}.

   This document adds new type definitions to the YANG modules and
   obsoletes {{?RFC9093}}.  For further details, see the revision
   statements of the YANG module in {{yang-code}} or the summary in
   {{changes-bis}}.

   The YANG data model in this document conforms to the Network
   Management Datastore Architecture defined in {{!RFC8342}}.

## Terminology and Notations

   Refer to {{?RFC7446}} and {{?RFC7581}} for the key terms used in this
   document, and the terminology for describing YANG data models can be
   found in {{!RFC7950}}.

{::boilerplate bcp14}

## Prefix in Data Node Names

   In this document, names of data nodes and other data model objects
   are prefixed using the standard prefix associated with the
   corresponding YANG imported modules.

| Prefix       | YANG module                      | Reference
| l0-types     | ietf-layer0-types                | RFC XXXX
{: #tab-prefixes title="Prefixes and corresponding YANG modules"}

RFC Editor Note:
Please replace XXXX with the RFC number assigned to this document.

   The YANG module "ietf-layer0-types" (defined in {{yang-code}}) references
   {{!RFC4203}}, {{!RFC6163}}, {{!RFC6205}}, {{!RFC7698}}, {{!RFC7699}}, {{!RFC8363}},
   {{ITU-T_G.694.1}}, and {{ITU-T_G.694.2}}.

# Layer 0 Types Module Contents

   This document defines a YANG module for common Layer 0 types, ietf-
   layer0-types.  This module is used for WSON and flexi-grid DWDM
   networks.  The "ietf-layer0-types" module contains the following YANG
   reusable types and groupings:

   l0-grid-type:

   > A base YANG identity for the grid type as defined in {{!RFC6163}} and
     {{!RFC7698}}.

   dwdm-ch-spc-type:

   > A base YANG identity for the DWDM channel-spacing type as defined
     in {{!RFC6205}}.

   cwdm-ch-spc-type:

   > A base YANG identity for the Coarse Wavelength Division
     Multiplexing (CWDM) channel-spacing type as defined in {{!RFC6205}}.

   wson-label-start-end:

   > The WSON label range was defined in {{!RFC6205}}, and the generic
     topology model defines the label-start/label-end in {{!RFC8795}}.
     This grouping shows the WSON-specific label-start and label-end
     information.

   wson-label-hop:

   > The WSON label range was defined in {{!RFC6205}}, and the generic
     topology model defines the label-hop in {{!RFC8795}}.  This grouping
     shows the WSON-specific label-hop information.

   l0-label-range-info:

   > A YANG grouping that defines the Layer 0 label range information
     applicable for WSON as defined in {{!RFC6205}}.  This grouping is
     used in the flexi-grid DWDM by adding more flexi-grid-specific
     parameters.

   wson-label-step:

   > A YANG grouping that defines label steps for WSON as defined in
     {{!I-D.ietf-teas-rfc8776-update}}.

   flexi-grid-label-start-end:

  > The flexi-grid label range was defined in {{!RFC7698}}, and the
  generic topology model defines the label-start/label-end in
  {{!RFC8795}}.  This grouping shows the flexi-grid-specific label-
  start and label-end information which is used to describe the range of available nominal central frequencies.

  > As described in section 3.1 of {{!RFC8363}}, the range of available nominal central frequencies are advertised for m=1, which means that for an available central frequency n, the frequency slot from central frequency n-1 to central frequency n+1 is available.

   flexi-grid-label-hop:

   > The flexi-grid label range was defined in {{!RFC7698}}, and the
     generic topology model defines the label-hop in {{!RFC8795}}.  This
     grouping shows the WSON-specific label-hop information.

   flexi-grid-label-range-info:

   > A YANG grouping that defines flexi-grid label range information as
     defined in {{!RFC7698}} and {{!RFC8363}}.

   flexi-grid-label-step:

   > A YANG grouping that defines flexi-grid label steps as defined in
     {{!I-D.ietf-teas-rfc8776-update}}.

   transceiver-capabilities:

   > a YANG grouping to define the transceiver capabilities (also called
   "modes") needed to determine optical signal compatibility.

   standard-mode:

   > a YANG grouping for ITU-T G.698.2 standard mode that guarantees
   interoperability.

   organizational-mode:

   > a YANG grouping to define transponder operational mode supported by
   organizations or vendors.

   common-explicit-mode:

   > a YANG grouping to define the list of attributes related to optical
   impairments limits in case of transceiver explicit mode.  This
   grouping should be the same used in
   {{?I-D.ietf-ccamp-dwdm-if-param-yang}}.

   common-organizational-explicit-mode:

   > a YANG grouping to define the common capabilities attributes limit
   range in case of operational mode and explicit mode.  Also this
   grouping should be used in {{?I-D.ietf-ccamp-dwdm-if-param-yang}}.

   cd-pmd-penalty:
   
   > a YANG grouping to define the triplet used as entries in the list
   optional penalty associated with a given accumulated CD and PMD.
   This list of triplet cd, pmd, penalty can be used to sample the
   function penalty = f(CD, PMD).

{: #yang-code}

# YANG Module for Layer 0 Types

~~~~ yang
{::include ./ietf-layer0-types.yang}
~~~~
{: #fig-te-yang title="Layer 0 Types YANG module"
sourcecode-markers="true" sourcecode-name="ietf-layer0-types@2023-07-07.yang"}


# Security Considerations

   The YANG module specified in this document defines a schema for data
   that is designed to be accessed via network management protocols such
   as NETCONF {{!RFC6241}} or RESTCONF {{!RFC8040}}.  The lowest NETCONF layer
   is the secure transport layer, and the mandatory-to-implement secure
   transport is Secure Shell (SSH) {{!RFC6242}}.  The lowest RESTCONF layer
   is HTTPS, and the mandatory-to-implement secure transport is TLS
   {{!RFC8446}}.

   The Network Configuration Access Control Model (NACM) {{!RFC8341}}
   provides the means to restrict access for particular NETCONF or
   RESTCONF users to a preconfigured subset of all available NETCONF or
   RESTCONF protocol operations and content.  The NETCONF protocol over
   Secure Shell (SSH) specification {{!RFC6242}} describes a method for
   invoking and running NETCONF within a Secure Shell (SSH) session as
   an SSH subsystem.

   The objects in this YANG module are common data types and groupings.
   No object in this module can be read or written to.  These
   definitions can be imported and used by other Layer 0 specific
   modules.  It is critical to consider how imported definitions will be
   utilized and accessible via RPC operations, as the resultant schema
   will have data nodes that can be writable, or readable, and will have
   a significant effect on the network operations if used incorrectly or
   maliciously.  All of these considerations belong in the document that
   defines the modules that import from this YANG module.  Therefore, it
   is important to manage access to resultant data nodes that are
   considered sensitive or vulnerable in some network environments.

   The security considerations spelled out in the YANG 1.1 specification
   {{!RFC7950}} apply for this document as well.

# IANA Considerations

For the following URI in the "IETF XML Registry" {{?RFC3688}}, IANA has updated the reference field to refer to this document:

~~~~
   URI:  urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-layer0-types
   Registrant Contact:  The IESG
   XML:  N/A; the requested URI is an XML namespace.
~~~~

This document also adds an updated YANG module to the "YANG Module
Names" registry {{!RFC7950}}:

~~~~
   Name:  ietf-layer0-types
   Namespace:  urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-layer0-types
   Prefix:  l0-types
   Reference:  RFC XXXX
~~~~

RFC Editor Note: Please replace XXXX with the RFC number assigned to this document.

--- back

{: #changes-bis}

# Changes from RFC 9093

To be added in a future revision of this draft.

{: numbered="false"}

# Acknowledgments

   The authors and the working group give their sincere thanks to Robert
   Wilton for the YANG doctor review and Tom Petch for his comments
   during the model and document development.

   This document was prepared using kramdown.
